After the procedure
Arthroscopic surgery usually doesn't take long. For example, arthroscopy of the knee takes about an hour. After that, you'll be taken to a separate room to recover for a few hours before going home.

Your aftercare may include:

Medications. Your doctor may prescribe medication to relieve pain and inflammation.
R.I.C.E. At home, may find it helpful to rest, ice, compress and elevate the joint for several days to reduce swelling and pain.
Protection. You might need to use temporary splints — slings or crutches for comfort and protection.
Exercises. Your doctor might prescribe physical therapy and rehabilitation to help strengthen your muscles and improve the function of your joint.
Call your surgeon if you develop:

A fever
Pain not helped by medication
Drainage from your incision
Redness or swelling
New numbness or tingling
Results
In general, you should be able to resume desk work and light activity in a few days. You'll likely be able to drive again in one to three weeks, and engage in more strenuous activity a few weeks after that.

However, not everyone's recovery is the same. Your situation might dictate a longer recovery period and rehabilitation.

Your surgeon will review the findings of the arthroscopy with you as soon as possible and may send a written report. Your surgeon will continue to monitor your progress in follow-up visits and address problems.

When is arthroscopy used?
Your bones, cartilage, ligaments, muscles, and tendons can all be damaged by disease and injury. To diagnose your condition, your doctor will take a thorough medical history, perform a physical examination and order imaging studies — usually x-rays. For some conditions, an additional imaging study — such as a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan or a computerized tomography (CT) scan — may also be needed.  After making a diagnosis, your doctor will determine the most appropriate treatment choice for your condition.

Conditions
Conditions that are commonly treated with arthroscopic procedures include:

Inflammation. For example, synovitis is a condition that causes the tissues surrounding the knee, shoulder, elbow, wrist, and ankle joint to become inflamed.
Acute or chronic injuries, including:
Rotator cuff tendon tears
Shoulder impingement
Recurrent dislocation in the shoulder
Meniscal (cartilage) tears in the knee
Chondromalacia (wearing or injury of the cartilage cushion in the knee)
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears with instability in the knee
Carpal tunnel syndrome in the wrist
Loose bodies of bone and/or cartilage, particularly in the knee, shoulder, elbow, ankle, or wrist
Some problems associated with arthritis can also be treated arthroscopically.

Procedures
The procedures below are performed either with arthroscopy or with a combination of arthroscopic and open surgery:

Rotator cuff repair
Repair or resection of torn cartilage (meniscus) from the knee or shoulder
Reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in the knee
Removal of the synovium in the knee, shoulder, elbow, wrist, or ankle
Release of the carpal tunnel in the wrist
Repair of torn ligaments
Removal of loose bone or cartilage in the knee, shoulder, elbow, wrist, or ankle
Although the inside of nearly all joints can be viewed with an arthroscope, six joints are most frequently examined with this instrument. These are the knee, shoulder, elbow, ankle, hip and wrist. As advances are made in fiberoptic technology and new techniques are developed by orthopaedic surgeons, other joints may be treated more frequently in the future.

Before being discharged, you will be given instructions on caring for your incisions, what activities to avoid, and which exercises you should do to aid your recovery. During the follow-up visit, the surgeon will inspect your incisions; remove sutures, if present; and discuss your rehabilitation program.

The amount of surgery required and recovery time will depend on the complexity of your problem. Occasionally, during arthroscopy, the surgeon may discover that the injury or disease cannot be treated adequately with arthroscopy alone.  More extensive open surgery may be performed while you are still anesthetized, or at a later date after you have discussed the findings with your surgeon.

What are the possible complications?
Although uncommon, complications do occur occasionally during or after arthroscopy. Infection, blood clots of a vein (also called deep vein thrombosis or DVT), excessive swelling or bleeding, damage to blood vessels or nerves, and instrument breakage are the most common complications; however, these occur in far less than 1 percent of all arthroscopic procedures.

What are the advantages?
Although arthroscopic surgery has received a lot of public attention because it is often used to treat well-known athletes, it is an extremely valuable tool for all orthopaedic patients and is generally easier on the patient than open surgery. Most patients have their arthroscopic surgery as outpatients and are home several hours after the surgery.

What is recovery like after arthroscopy?
The small puncture wounds take several days to heal. The operative dressing can usually be removed the morning after surgery and adhesive strips can be applied to cover the small healing incisions.

Although the puncture wounds are small and pain in the joint that underwent arthroscopy is minimal, it takes several weeks for the joint to maximally recover. A specific activity and rehabilitation program may be suggested to speed your recover and protect future joint function.

It is not unusual for patients to go back to work or school or resume daily activities within a few days. Athletes and others who are in good physical condition may, in some cases, return to athletic activities within a few weeks. Remember, though, that people who have arthroscopy can have many different diagnoses and preexisting conditions, so each patient's arthroscopic surgery is unique to that person. Recovery time will reflect that individuality.

What About Recovery?
When the arthroscopy is over, you'll be taken to a recovery room where you'll rest for about an hour or more. You may have some pain in the joint after surgery. Your doctor may prescribe pain medication and exercise. They might also prescribe aspirin or other medication to prevent blood clots.

Apply ice for the first 24 hours to reduce swelling. If you've had arthroscopy on your knee, elevate the leg to reduce pain. Take pain medicines as prescribed, and do not drink alcohol.

You may need crutches, a splint, or a sling for support as you recover.

Arthroscopic surgery usually results in less joint pain and stiffness than open surgery. Recovery also generally takes less time.

You’ll have small puncture wounds where the arthroscopic tools went into your body. The day after surgery, you may be able to remove the surgical bandages and replace them with small strips to cover the incisions. Your doctor will remove non-dissolvable stitches after a week or 2.

While your wounds heal, you’ll have to keep the site as dry as possible. This means covering them with a plastic bag when you shower.

Your doctor will tell you what activities to avoid when you go home. You can often go back to work or school within a few days of surgery. Full joint recovery typically takes several weeks. It may take several months to get back to normal.

Rehabilitation or specific exercises can help speed your recovery. Your doctor will tell you which ones are safe to do.

SUGGESTED:
Sign up for WebMD's FREE Newsletter
When to Call the Doctor
Complications are rare. They happen in fewer than 1 in 100 cases. If you do have complications, they can include infection, blood clots, damage to the blood vessels or nerves, and excessive bleeding or swelling. Instruments can also break during surgery.

Call your doctor right away if you have any of these symptoms:

Fever
Pain that gets worse
Severe swelling
Numbness or tingling
Discolored or smelly fluid seeping from wound

Recovering from an arthroscopy
Recovery from arthroscopic surgery is usually faster than open surgery.

You may have some pain, swelling, bruising and stiffness after the surgery. You can take pain-relief medicines to help ease pain and discomfort.

You might also be advised to:

keep the affected joint raised
apply ice packs to reduce swelling
wear a pressure stocking
use a splint, supportive brace or crutches
do special exercises or physiotherapy to strengthen your muscles and prevent joint stiffness
You might need to have a few days or a week off before returning to work or school. Your doctor will talk with you about managing your wound dressings.

Recovery will depend on your condition and the procedure performed. Ask your doctor about what to expect in your situation.

Possible risks or complications
Any type of surgery has some risks. While most arthroscopies go smoothly, possible complications can include:

infection
a deep vein thrombosis (blood clot), usually in the leg
bleeding inside your joint
nerve damage or numbness
ongoing pain
Contact your doctor immediately if you have:

high fever
severe pain
redness or excess swelling around the wounds
numbness
bad smelling fluid leaking from the incisions

When do you need knee arthroscopy?
Knee arthroscopy may be recommended if you experience knee problems or injuries such as:

Torn anterior or posterior cruciate ligaments
Torn meniscus (the cartilage between the bones in the knee)
Patella that’s out of position
Pieces of torn cartilage that are loose in the joint
Removal of a Baker’s cyst
Swollen synovium (the lining in the joint)

Care and recovery after knee arthroscopy
Knee arthroscopy is a minimally invasive procedure. The recovery time after knee arthroscopy is shorter compared to open surgery.

Light activity is possible 1 – 3 weeks after the procedure. The amount of time taken to fully recover may differ depending on the individual. However, you will most likely be able to resume your normal daily activities after 6 – 8 weeks.

Your doctor will instruct you on caring for your incision wounds at home, which may include:

Applying ice packs to reduce swelling and pain
Changing the dressing regularly, as directed, to prevent infection
Getting sufficient rest
Keeping your leg elevated for several days after surgery
Relieving pressure on the knee joint by using crutches
Taking pain medication as directed

Meniscal tears
One of the primary reasons for performing arthroscopies is to repair or trim a painful and torn or damaged meniscus.[17] The technical terms for the surgery is arthroscopic partial meniscectomy (APM). Arthroscopic surgery, however, does not appear to result in benefits to adults when performed for knee pain in patients with osteoarthritis who have a meniscal tear.[18][12][19] This may be due to the fact that a torn meniscus may often not cause pain and symptoms, which may be caused by the osteoarthritis alone.[20] Some groups have made a strong recommendation against arthroscopic partial meniscectomy in nearly all patients, stating that the only group of patients who may—or may not—benefit are those with a true locked knee.[2] Professional knee societies, however, highlight other symptoms and related factors they believe are important, and continue to support limited use of arthroscopic partial meniscectomy in carefully selected patients.[21][22]

Hip
Main article: Hip arthroscopy
Hip arthroscopy was initially used for the diagnosis of unexplained hip pain, but is now widely used in the treatment of conditions both in and outside the hip joint. The most common indication currently is for the treatment of femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) and its associated pathologies. Hip conditions that may be treated arthroscopically also includes labral tears, loose / foreign body removal, hip washout (for infection) or biopsy, chondral (cartilage) lesions, osteochondritis dissecans, ligamentum teres injuries (and reconstruction), Iliopsoas tendinopathy (or 'snapping psoas'), trochanteric pain syndrome, snapping iliotibial band, osteoarthritis (controversial), sciatic nerve compression (piriformis syndrome), ischiofemoral impingement and direct assessment of hip replacement.

Hip arthroscopy is a widely adopted treatment for a range of conditions, including labral tears, femoroacetabular impingement, osteochondritis dissecans.[23]

Shoulder
Arthroscopy is commonly used for treatment of diseases of the shoulder including subacromial impingement, acromioclavicular osteoarthritis, rotator cuff tears, frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis), chronic tendonitis, removal of loose bodies and partial tears of the long biceps tendon, SLAP lesions and shoulder instability. The most common indications include subacromial decompression, bankarts lesion repair and rotator cuff repair. All these procedures were done by opening the joint through big incisions before the advent of arthroscopy. Arthroscopic shoulder surgeries have gained momentum in the past decade. "Keyhole surgery" of the shoulder as it is popularly known has reduced inpatient time and rehabilitation requirements and is often a daycare procedure.

There are several therapeutic wrist arthroscopy indications, in this article the focus will be on the TFCC-lesion, the SL-lesion, the dorsal ganglion resection and the distal radius fracture.[citation needed]

TFCC lesion
The TFCC is a fibrous structure covering both the radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joint. Tears in this ligament occur commonly after a person falls or secondary to a wrist fracture. Abnormalities in the TFCC are classified with the Palmer Classification, which divides the tears in a traumatic or degenerative stage.[2] Both stages of TFCC tears are treatable with an arthroscopic intervention, although the degenerative stage is operated according to the "Arthroscopic wafer procedure".[3] In this procedure, the surgeon debrides the TFCC and a limited part of the ulnar head. If the patient has a Class 1 TFCC tear, a different arthroscopic technique is used. Damaged tissue will be debrided until fresh edges are available for arthroscopic repair.[4] Good to excellent results have been reported on TFCC Class 1B repair for 85-90% of the patients. And 90% of the results for the Arthroscopic wafer procedure were good to excellent.[5]

Scapholunate and lunotriquetral instability
The initial treatment of patients with a suspected tear of the scapholunate and lunotriquetral interosseous ligament is a splint of the wrist. If the pain and instability persists, one could undergo an open surgery to reconstruct the scapholunate ligament. The lunotriquetral shear test may also be used. Arthroscopy is until today in an experimental stage but research suggest that in the near future it will be a reasonable alternative for open surgery due to faster recovery time.[6] For a tear in the lunotriquetral ligament, arthroscopic debridement is the prime treatment with a loss or reduction of symptoms of 78-100%.[7]

Dorsal ganglion resection
28 to 58% of the dorsal ganglia resolve spontaneously, still some patients choose to undergo cosmetic intervention for resection of the ganglion when non-operative treatment failed. Some examples of this non-operative treatment are immobilization through a splint or aspiration of the ganglion with or without injection of a steroid. In some cases the ganglia are associated with serious loss of wrist function or weakness in the affected finger, which makes a surgical intervention highly indicated.[8]

Resection of dorsal ganglion are still widely treated with open surgery. However, recent studies show that treatment with an arthroscopic intervention is a reasonable alternative. Arthroscopic intervention has the advantages of smaller incisions, faster recovery of wrist function and less pain postoperative. Overall outcome of arthroscopy is not superior to the outcome in open surgery. Recurrence rates and final wrist function are similar.[9]

Distal radius fracture
Distal radius fractures might occur when a person falls on an outstretched hand (FOOSH). Immediate pain, swelling and loss of wrist function are the most common symptoms. These fractures have wide variety of classification systems, but for arthroscopic intervention a difference is made between extra- or intra-articular fractures. Arthroscopy can be used to treat an intra-articular distal radius fracture and at the same time examine the Scapholunate ligament, Lunotriquetral ligament and articular disk.[5] The shifted bone segment is relocated, in necessary a bone autograft can be used to fill up the fracture. At the end the fracture is stabilized using percutane wires. Arthroscopy has good results as treatment for distal radius fracture, with over 85% of the patiënts showing good to excellent postoperative results.[10]

Diagnostic uses
Persistent pain in the wrist after conservative treatment is the major indication for a diagnostic wrist arthroscopy. Conservative treatment consists of wrist immobilization, oral NSAIDs and/or injection with corticoids.[11] Diagnostic wrist arthroscopy may also be indicated when other imaging techniques, such as MRI and ultrasonography, need confirmation on observed uncertainties or when other imaging techniques failed to establish a clear diagnosis. This makes arthroscopy an important diagnostic tool for some common anomalies around the wrist.[12] However, relying on arthroscopic findings in the setting of an unclear preoperative diagnosis yields limited diagnostic benefit. Therefore, its use should be limited to the cases with other objective clinical findings.[13]

Diagnostic Indications	Explanation
Ganglion	A cavity in a joint capsule filled with thick fluid
SL-lesion	Tear of the Scapholunate ligament
LT-lesion	Tear of the Lunotriquetral ligament
TFCC-lesion	Tear in the TFCC. Classification according Palmer Classification in traumatic or degenerative lesion
Synovitis	Inflammation of the synovial membrane
Cartilage decrease	A short of cartilage can cause arthritis

Hip arthroscopy

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Hip arthroscopy

Intraoperative fluoroscopic image during an arthroscopic resection of a cam lesion of the femur. The upper instrument is the arthroscope (viewing device), while the lower is the high-speed burr used for reshaping the bone.
[edit on Wikidata]
Hip arthroscopy refers to the viewing of the interior of the acetabulofemoral (hip) joint through an arthroscope and the treatment of hip pathology through a minimally invasive approach. This technique is sometimes used to help in the treatment of various joint disorders and has gained popularity because of the small incisions used and shorter recovery times when compared with conventional surgical techniques (sometimes referred to as "open surgery"). Hip arthroscopy was not feasible until recently, new technology in both the tools used and the ability to distract the hip joint has led to a recent surge in the ability to do hip arthroscopy and the popularity of it.[citation needed]

History
The first man to describe the use of an arthroscope to see inside a joint was Severin Nordentoft, from Denmark, in 1912. Since that time, the field of arthroscopy has evolved to encompass diagnostic and therapeutic procedures to many joints. Technical advances in instrument manufacture and optical technologies have, in part, made it possible for the surgeon to gain access to reliable views of increasingly smaller joint spaces. Now, there is an International Society for Hip Arthroscopy (ISHA), comprising some of the leading hip arthroscopy specialists in the world.[citation needed]

Arthroscopic techniques have become an increasingly popular method of treating hip conditions. Although first described in the 1970s, since approximately 2000 the indications and numbers of hip arthroscopic procedures performed worldwide have expanded widely. This is due mainly to the identification of pathological conditions such as femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) and tears of the acetabular labrum.[citation needed]

The concept of FAI was first described by Smith-Petersen.[1] However, modern diagnosis and treatment of FAI was pioneered by Ganz in 2003,[2][3] who initially advocated the use of an open surgical dislocation technique for treatment of intra-articular pathology. This involved the use of the 'trochanteric flip' approach to gain access to the hip joint. This is an extensive approach, needing an often large incision over the side of the hip, with the detachment of the greater trochanter of the femur and its attached musculature to gain access to the joint. By using this approach, the ball of the hip joint can be rotated out of the socket (termed 'surgical dislocation'), giving 360-degree access to the whole joint. This approach, although considered generally safe, carries with it inherent risks, which is the case with all large incision surgery. The risks of infection and blood clots are always present, and Ganz and his colleagues cite complications such as heterotopic ossification (new bone formation around the hip), nerve injuries, failure of the greater trochanter to heal back properly, persistent pain following the formation of scar tissue (adhesions) in the hip joint, and a small risk of damage of the blood supply to the femoral head. The patient usually needs to stay in hospital for a few days, and the post-operative rehabilitation after such extensive surgery can be prolonged. As a result, surgeons have looked to use the arthroscope more extensively in the hip joint in an attempt to avoid the possible pitfalls of large, open surgery. The perceived advantages of this are the avoidance of large scars, decreased blood loss, faster recovery periods and less pain.[4] Hip arthroscopy can be performed as an outpatient procedure (i.e. no need to stay in hospital overnight).

Indications

Figure 6. Diagram of the bony pathology of both cam and pincer impingement

Figure 7. A complex labral tear. An arthroscopic probe is seen at the junction of the labrum and acetabular rim
Hip arthroscopy was initially used for the diagnosis of unexplained hip pain, but is now widely used in the treatment of conditions both in and outside the hip joint itself. The most common indication is for the treatment of FAI (femoral acetabular impingement)[5] and its associated pathologies such as labral tears[6] and cartilage abnormalities,[7] among others (see Table 1).

Table 1. A selection of hip conditions that may be treated arthroscopically.

Femoroacetabular impingement (see fig. 6)
Labral tears (see fig. 7)
Loose / foreign body removal
Hip washout (for infection) or biopsy
Chondral (cartilage) lesions (see fig. 8)
Osteochondritis dissecans
Ligamentum teres injuries (and reconstruction)
Iliopsoas tendinopathy (or 'snapping psoas')
Trochanteric pain syndrome
Snapping iliotibial band
Osteoarthritis (controversial)
Sciatic nerve compression (piriformis syndrome)
Ischiofemoral impingement
Direct assessment of hip replacement [8]
Technique
Figure 3. Fluoroscopic picture showing a mild amount of distraction of the hip before insertion of any instruments
Figure 3. Fluoroscopic picture showing a mild amount of distraction of the hip before insertion of any instruments

 
Figure 4. A needle is passed into the joint, breaking the 'suction seal', and allowing further distraction of the hip joint with minimal extra traction
Figure 4. A needle is passed into the joint, breaking the 'suction seal', and allowing further distraction of the hip joint with minimal extra traction

 
Figure 5. Portal placement under direct vision. The instrument is entering the joint through the hip capsule, between the femoral head (on the left) and acetabular labrum (on the right)
Figure 5. Portal placement under direct vision. The instrument is entering the joint through the hip capsule, between the femoral head (on the left) and acetabular labrum (on the right)

The procedure is performed with the patient asleep (general anaesthetic) or under spinal anaesthesia. There are two widely used methods, one with the patient on their back (supine) and the other on their side (lateral decubitus). Which is used is down to the surgeon's preference. To gain access to the central compartment of the hip joint (between the ball and socket), traction is applied to the affected leg after placing the foot into a special boot. (See fig. 2) There is specifically designed equipment for this, although some surgeons use a 'traction table', initially designed to help in the operative fixation of broken thigh and lower leg bones. The amount of traction (or pull) needed is assessed with the help of fluoroscopy (low-dose portable x-ray). (See fig. 3) It is usually not possible to distract the ball from the socket with traction alone by more than a few millimetres. Once the surgeon is happy that they will be able to gain access to the hip joint (i.e. the ball will distract from the socket by a small amount), the patient is then painted with antiseptic and the surgical drapes applied.[citation needed]

The next step is to insert a fine needle under x-ray guidance into the hip joint. This breaks the 'suction seal' of the joint and allows further distraction if necessary (see fig 4). The surgeon wishes to see the ball move out the socket by approximately 1 cm, so that access to the hip joint can be achieved with minimal risk of damage to the joint surfaces. Most surgeons will inject fluid into the joint at this stage, again to ensure that there is enough space between the ball and socket for safe instrument access. This needle is then removed. The next step is placement of the 'portals', or the small holes made to pass instruments into the joint. This is achieved by again passing a fresh hollow needle into the joint under x-ray control, usually in a slightly different position. The reason for this is so the surgeon can ensure that the needle, and subsequent cannulae do not penetrate and damage the acetabular labrum or cartilage joint surfaces (see fig. 5). Again, surgeons will have their own preferences as to their preferred placement. Through this hollow needle, a long thin flexible guide wire is passed into the joint, and the needle is removed over it, leaving the guide wire in situ. A small cut in the skin is made around the wire, to allow for larger cannulae to be placed over the wire through the portal. The wire therefore guides the larger cannulae into the joint. The most common external diameters of cannulae used are between 4.5 and 5.5 mm. Once the surgeon is satisfied that the cannula is in the correct position, by a combination of feel and x-ray guidance, the guide wire can be withdrawn. Once the first portal is correctly placed, any further portals may be created once the camera is in position, to ensure that they are placed with minimal risk to the joint surfaces. This process can be repeated to gain as many points of entry to the hip joint as the surgeon requires, normally between two and four. Certain of these entry points will be used for the viewing arthroscope and others for operating instruments.

The operation then begins, a variety of instruments being used. While the surgeon views the interior of the hip joint through the arthroscope, other operating instruments are introduced through the other portals. Once the surgeon has completed the procedure needed between the ball and socket, often referred to as the 'central compartment' of the hip, traction is released, allowing the ball of the hip to sit back snugly into its socket. The arthroscope is then moved to the 'peripheral compartment' an area still inside the hip joint itself but outside its ball and socket portion.

Commonly used arthroscopic tools are the hook probe, used to assess the integrity and consistency of the hip, radiofrequency probes that ablate soft tissue and can also smoothen tissue surfaces, and various shavers or burrs that can take away diseased tissue. If the acetabular labrum requires repair, specially designed anchors may be used. This is by no means a comprehensive list as new instruments are being developed constantly.

Cam-type femoroacetabular impingement

Figure 8.Cartilage delamination. A small area of acetabular cartilage has lifted from the underlying bone, being demonstrated by use of the arthroscopic probe
Cam impingement is created by the abnormal development of the femoral head-neck junction causing what has previously been described as a 'pistol-grip deformity'. This type of deformity is characterised by varying amounts of abnormal bone on the anterior and superior femoral neck at the head-neck junction (see fig. 6). The head-neck junction is at the base of the ball of the hip, where it joins the short neck, which in turn carries on downwards into the femur, or thighbone, itself. A bony protrusion or bump at the head-neck junction has been likened to a cam, an eccentric part of a rotating device. This leads to joint damage as a result of the non-spherical femoral head being forced into the acetabulum mainly with flexion and/or internal rotation. This may impart compression and shear forces to the articular cartilage, and may lead to labral tears and peeling away of the articular cartilage from the underlying bone, so-called cartilage delamination (see fig. 8).[9][10]

Standard arthroscopic treatment of symptomatic cam FAI involves debridement (resection) or repair of any labral [10] and chondral injuries [11] in the central compartment of the hip, and subsequent reshaping of the head-neck junction of the upper femur (osteochondroplasty) in the peripheral compartment [12][13] using high-speed motorised burrs that are similar in design to a dentist's drill (see fig. 9).

Pincer-type femoroacetabular impingement
In contrast, pincer impingement is a result of an abnormality on the acetabular side of the hip joint.[2] The acetabulum may either have a more posterior orientation than normal, otherwise known as acetabular retroversion (seen as the crossover sign on AP radiographs), or there may be extra bone around the rim. This results in contact of the femoral neck against the labrum and rim of the acetabulum during hip movement earlier than might otherwise be the case. Repeated contact between the femoral neck and the edge of the acetabulum may lead to damage to the labrum and adjacent articular cartilage. Bone formation, or ossification within the labrum may be commonly seen as a result of this repeated contact. It is thought that this type of impingement may also predispose to the development of osteoarthritis.

The goal of the arthroscopic treatment of pincer impingement is to reduce the acetabular over coverage of the hip. Methods to reduce this over coverage of the ball by the socket include labral detachment or peel back, acetabular rim trimming using burrs, often reattaching the labrum with anchors at the end of the procedure. With the exception of cases of severe global over coverage of the hip, or situations in which the existing labrum has turned to bone (or ossified), excessive acetabular rim resection should be avoided in order to prevent iatrogenic increases in hip joint contact pressures.[14]

Labral tears
The acetabular labrum is a fibrous structure, which surrounds the femoral head. It forms a seal to the hip joint,[15] although its true function is poorly understood. Recent evidence has demonstrated that this hydraulic seal is vital for maintaining stability of the ball and socket joint [16] and reducing contact pressures of the femur to the acetabulum.[17] The labrum has also been shown to have a nerve supply and as such may cause pain if damaged.[18] The underside of the labrum is continuous with the acetabular articular cartilage so any compressive forces that affect the labrum may also cause articular cartilage damage, particularly at the junction between the two, the chondrolabral junction. The labrum may be damaged or torn as part of an underlying process, such as FAI or dysplasia (shallow hip socket), or may be injured directly by a traumatic event. Depending on the type of tear, the labrum may be either trimmed (debrided) or repaired. Removing or debriding the labrum is becoming less popular as the latest research shows that results are more predictable in the long term if the labrum can be repaired. Various techniques are available for labral repair, mainly using anchors, which may be used to re-stabilise the labrum against the underlying bone, allowing it to heal in position.

New techniques are prevalent in hip arthroscopy. There is good evidence to support the creation of a new labrum by performing a labral reconstruction if the patient has previously had a labral debridement, has an ossified labrum, or the current labrum is too small or injured for a repair.[16] Labral reconstruction involves creating a new labrum either from the patients own tissue (autograft) or from cadaver tissue (allograft). The new labrum is then anchored into position with bone anchors and the hip then goes through extensive rehab.

Extra-articular syndromes
The hip arthroscope may also be used to treat other conditions, which are outside the hip joint capsule. These include greater trochanteric pain syndrome (GTPS), snapping iliotibial band,[19] piriformis syndrome, deep gluteal syndrome [20] and ischiofemoral impingement. Although the majority of these are newly described techniques, the results appear favorable.

Each surgeon will have their own preferred physiotherapy schedule. Many are on their individual websites. A variable period on crutches after hip arthroscopy is common although physiotherapy is seen by many to play a very significant part in post-operative recovery. The regime usually starts with encouragement for a free range of movement, stretches and isometric exercises leading to subsequent dynamic, plyometric and weights exercises. Impact activities are usually discouraged for a minimum of three months, and contact sports for four. Using a simple stationery pedal device the first day after surgery can be key to immediate flexibility and mobility after surgery.

Healing
One of the main advantages of arthroscopic surgery is that it limits damage to the soft-tissues surrounding the joint. Not only are bleeding, swelling, and inflammation minimized, but recovery tends to be shorter than with open surgery.

Once the joint no longer requires immobilization, range-of-motion and strengthening exercises can usually begin to restore flexibility and strength in the joint. It often helps to work with a physical therapist who can provide in-office therapies (like hydrotherapy and soft tissue mobilization) and design an exercise and rehabilitation program you can perform at home.

You should also ensure regular follow-up visits with your orthopedist to monitor for any new or unexpected complications and ensure that your condition is improving as expected.

 Physical Therapy Treatments for Knee Pain
Coping With Recovery
Even though you can usually return to normal activity faster with arthroscopic surgery, it can take many months before you are fully recovered and symptom-free. During this time, there are limitations to how much activity you should do.

Type of Arthroscopic Surgery	Recovery Time
Chondromalacia repair	4 to 5 months
Rotator cuff tear	3 to 6 months
Shoulder impingement syndrome	3 to 6 months
Meniscus repair	3 to 8 months
ACL repair	6 to 9 months
Carpal tunnel surgery 	Up to 10 months

Week-by-Week Rehabilitation


Weeks 0 to 2
During the first few weeks of your arthroscopic knee surgery recovery, you should be bearing weight as tolerated with crutches. You should be progressing to full weight bearing without the use of crutches.

Range of Motion (ROM)

0 to 125 degrees is expected
Rehab Exercises

Quad sets, glute sets
Ankle pumps
Hamstring and calf stretches
Multi-angle isometrics for quads (90 to 60 degrees)
Straight leg raises (multi-plane)
Knee extension, open chain 90 to 40 degrees
Patellar mobs
Heel slides to tolerance
Bicycle for ROM
Passive range of motion (PROM) focused on improving full extension ROM
Standing weight shifts
Standing mini squats 0 to 30 degrees
Low-level balance and proprioceptive exercises in standing
Proprioceptive exercises focus on the ability to sense movement within joints.
Weeks 2 to 4
Range of Motion (ROM)

Full ROM is expected
Rehab Exercises

Continue exercises from weeks 0 to 2 and all passive and active ROM
Standing hamstring curls
Bilateral protected ROM leg press
Bicycle for ROM and light cardiovascular endurance with no resistance
Stationary mini-lunge forward
Step-ups
Calf raises (standing bilateral –> unilateral)
Wall slides
Progress standing balance and proprioceptive exercises
Pool walking program once incisions are fully closed
Weeks 4 to 6
Rehab Exercises

Continue exercises from previous weeks and all passive and active ROM as needed
Step-downs
Lateral step-ups
Squats (increased ROM)
Stair stepper machine <20 minutes
Continue with exercises to achieve terminal knee extension
Bicycle for cardiovascular endurance with light to moderate resistance
Weeks 6 to 8
During these weeks and the following weeks, there are no restrictions to activities of daily living (ADLs).

Rehab Exercises

Continue exercises from previous weeks
Advance closed kinetic chain (CKCs) and functional exercises
Begin walking program for cardiovascular endurance
Gradually increase time on stair stepper for cardio endurance
Functional movement screen (FMS) at eight weeks
Weeks 8 to 12
Rehab Exercises

Light plyometrics (jump training) if good hip and knee mechanics, gradually advancing
Linear forward jogging in short bouts, gradually progressing jog intervals
Perturbation training (also known as improving reaction times)
May initiate gentle yoga
Initiate elliptical for cardiovascular endurance
Initiate forward agility drills (progressing to lateral as appropriate)
Begin a strength and conditioning program, like Access Acceleration
Week 12+
During this time period, your surgeon must clear you before you’re able to return to your sport.

Rehab Exercises

Progress jogging program, intervals and/or sprint training
Sport-specific training as needed: cutting, jumping, deep squats, etc.

Knee Arthroscopy Exercise Guide

Regular exercise to restore strength and mobility to your knee is important for your full recovery after arthroscopic surgery. Your orthopaedic surgeon or physical therapist may recommend that you exercise for approximately 20 to 30 minutes, 2 or 3 times a day. They may suggest some of the exercises shown below. They may also advise you to engage in a walking program.

This guide can help you better understand your exercise or activity program, supervised by your orthopaedic surgeon or physical therapist. To ensure your safe recovery, be sure to check with your therapist or surgeon before performing any of the exercises or activities shown.

Related Articles

TREATMENT
Knee Arthroscopy

Initial Exercise Program
Hamstring Contraction
No movement should occur in this exercise.

Lie or sit with your knees bent to about 10°.
Pull your heels into the floor, tightening the muscles on the back of your thigh. Hold for 5 seconds, then relax.
Repeat 10 times.
Hamstring contraction
Hamstring contraction

Quadriceps Contraction
Lie on stomach with a towel roll under the ankle of your involved knee.
Push your ankle down into the towel roll. Your leg should straighten as much as possible. Hold for 5 seconds, then relax.
Repeat 10 times.
Quadriceps contraction
Quadriceps contraction

Straight Leg Raises
Lie on your back, with your uninvolved knee bent.
Straighten your involved knee. Slowly lift your leg about 6 inches, then hold for 5 seconds. Keep your toes pointing up.
Continue lifting in 6-inch increments, holding each time.
Reverse the procedure and return to the starting position.
Repeat 10 times.
Advanced: Before starting, add weights to your ankle, starting with 1 pound of weight and building up to a maximum of 5 pounds of weight over 4 weeks.

Straight leg raises
Straight leg raises

Buttock Tucks
While lying down on your back, tighten your buttock muscles. Hold tightly for 5 seconds, then relax.
Repeat 10 times.
Buttock tucks
Buttock tucks

Straight Leg Raises, Standing
Support yourself, if necessary, and slowly lift your involved leg forward, keeping your knee straight.
Return to the starting position.
Repeat 10 times.
Advanced: Before starting, add weights to your ankle, starting with 1 pound of weight and building up to a maximum of 5 pounds of weight over 4 weeks.

Straight leg raises, standing
Straight leg raises, standing

To Top
Intermediate Exercise Program
Terminal Knee Extension, Supine
Lie on your back with a towel roll under your knee.
Straighten your knee (still supported by the roll) and hold for 5 seconds. Keep your toes pointing up.
Slowly return to the starting position.
Repeat 10 times.
Advanced: Before starting, add weights to your ankle, starting with 1 pound of weight and building up to a maximum of 5 pounds of weight over 4 weeks.

Terminal knee extension, supine
Terminal knee extension, supine

Straight Leg Raises
Lie on your back, with your uninvolved knee bent. Straighten your other knee with a quadriceps muscle contraction.
Now, slowly raise your leg until your foot is about 12 inches from the floor. Slowly lower your leg to the floor and relax.
Perform 5 sets of 10 repetitions.
Advanced: Before starting, add weights to your ankle, starting with 1 pound of weight and building up to a maximum of 5 pounds of weight over 4 weeks.

Straight leg raises
Straight leg raises

Partial Squat, with Chair
Hold onto a sturdy chair or counter with your feet 6 to 12 inches from the chair or counter.
While keeping your back straight, slowly bend your knees. DO NOT go any lower than 90°. Hold for 5 to 10 seconds.
Slowly come back up. Relax.
Repeat 10 times.
Partial squat, with chair
Partial squat, with chair

Quadriceps Stretch, Standing
Standing with your involved knee bent, gently pull heel toward buttocks, feeling a stretch in the front of the leg. Hold for 5 seconds.
Repeat 10 times.
Quadriceps stretch, standing
Quadriceps stretch, standing

To Top
Advanced Exercise Program
Knee Bend, Partial, Single Leg
Stand supporting yourself with the back of a chair.
Bend your uninvolved leg with your toe touching for balance as necessary.
Slowly lower yourself, keeping your foot flat.
Straighten up to the starting position. Relax.
Repeat 10 times.
Do not overdo this exercise!

Knee bend, partial, single leg
Knee bend, partial, single leg

Step-ups, Forward
Stand facing a 6-inch-high footstool or platform.
Step forward up onto the platform, leading with your involved leg.
Step down, returning to the starting position. 
Repeat 10 times.
Increase the height of the platform as your strength increases.

Step-ups, forward
Step-ups, forward

Step-ups, Lateral
Stand sideways next to a 6-inch-high footstool or platform. The outside of your involved leg should be beside the platform.
Step up onto the platform, leading with your involved leg.
Step down, returning to the starting position. 
Repeat 10 times.
Increase the height of the platform as your strength increases.

Step-ups, lateral
Step-ups, lateral

Terminal Knee Extension, Sitting
While sitting in a chair, support your involved heel on a stool.
Straighten your knee. Hold for 5 seconds.
Slowly return to the starting position.
Repeat 10 times.
Terminal knee extension, sitting
Terminal knee extension, sitting

Hamstring Stretch, Supine
Lie on your back.
Bend your hip, grasping your thigh just above the knee.
Slowly straighten your knee until you feel the tightness behind your knee. Hold for 5 seconds, then relax.
Repeat 10 times.
Repeat with the other leg.
If you do not feel this stretch, bend your hip a little more, and repeat.

No bouncing! Maintain a steady, prolonged stretch for the maximum benefit.

Hamstring stretch, supine
Hamstring stretch, supine

Hamstring Stretch, Supine at Wall
Lie next to a doorway with one leg extended. Place your heel against the wall. The closer you are to the wall, the more intense the stretch.
With your knee bent, move your hips toward the wall.
Begin to straighten your knee. When you feel the tightness behind your knee, hold for 5 seconds, then relax.
Repeat 10 times.
Repeat with the other leg.
Hamstring stretch, supine at wall
Hamstring stretch, supine at wall

Exercise Bike
If you have access to an exercise bike, adjust the seat height so that the bottom of your foot just touches the pedal and complete a full revolution. As you become stronger, slowly increase the tension on the bike.

Man riding exercise bike
Start pedaling for 10 minutes a day. Increase the duration by 1 minute a day until you are pedaling for 20 minutes a day.

Walking
Walking is an excellent physical exercise activity for the middle stages of your recovery from surgery (after 2 weeks).

Running
Your doctor may recommend that you avoid running activities for a period of time after surgery to protect your knee. The length of the restriction will depend on which type of procedure you had. For example, if you had an ACL reconstruction or meniscus repair, your running restriction will be different than if you had torn cartilage removed. Your doctor will tell you when it is safe to gradually resume your running activities.

Pain or Swelling after Exercise
As you increase the intensity of your exercise program, you may experience temporary setbacks. This is common. You may also have new discomfort behind the kneecap. This can happen if the quadriceps muscle weakens a bit after the surgery, which underscores the importance of exercise after knee arthroscopy.

If your knee swells or hurts after a specific exercise activity, you should limit or stop that activity until you feel better. You should then RICE your knee:

Rest. As much as possible, avoid activities that put weight on the knee for the first few days after symptoms appear.
Ice. Use cold packs for 20 minutes at a time, several times a day. Do not apply ice directly on the skin.
Compress with an elastic bandage.
Elevate. Rest with your knee above the level of your heart.
Contact your orthopaedic surgeon if your symptoms persist.

Shoulder arthroscopy
SLAP repair; SLAP lesion; Acromioplasty; Bankart repair; Labral repair; Bankart lesion; Shoulder repair; Shoulder surgery; Rotator cuff repair

Shoulder arthroscopy is surgery that uses a tiny camera called an arthroscope to examine or repair the tissues inside or around your shoulder joint. The arthroscope is inserted through a small cut (incision) in your skin.


Description
The rotator cuff is a group of muscles and their tendons that form a cuff over the shoulder joint. These muscles and tendons hold the arm in the shoulder joint. This also helps the shoulder move in different directions. The tendons in the rotator cuff can tear when they are overused or injured.

You will likely receive general anesthesia for this surgery. This means you will be asleep and unable to feel pain. Or, you may have regional anesthesia. Your arm and shoulder area will be numbed and as a result, you do not feel any pain. If you receive regional anesthesia, you will also be given medicine or general anesthesia to make you very sleepy during the operation.

During the procedure, the surgeon:

Inserts the arthroscope into your shoulder through a small incision. The scope is connected to a video monitor in the operating room.
Inspects all the tissues of your shoulder joint and the area above the joint. These tissues include the cartilage, bones, tendons, and ligaments.
Repairs any damaged tissues. To do this, your surgeon makes 1 to 3 more small incisions and inserts other instruments through them. A tear in a muscle, tendon, or cartilage is fixed. Any damaged tissue is removed.
Your surgeon may do one or more of these procedures during your operation:

Rotator cuff repair:

The edges of the tendon are brought together. The tendon is attached to the bone with sutures.
Small rivets (called suture anchors) are often used to help attach the tendon to the bone.
The anchors can be made of metal, plastic, or suture material alone. They do not need to be removed after surgery.
Surgery for impingement syndrome:

Damaged or inflamed tissue is cleaned out in the area above the shoulder joint.
A ligament called the coracoacromial ligament may be cut.
The underside of a bone called the acromion may be shaved. A bony growth (spur) on the underside of the acromion often causes impingement syndrome. The spur can cause inflammation and pain in your shoulder.
Surgery for shoulder instability:

If you have a torn labrum, the surgeon will repair it. The labrum is the cartilage that lines the rim of the shoulder joint.
Ligaments that attach to this area will also be repaired.
The Bankart lesion is a tear on the labrum in the lower part of the shoulder joint. It can involve part of the glenoid bone where it can be broken off.
A SLAP lesion involves the labrum and the ligament on the top part of the shoulder joint.
At the end of the surgery, the incisions will be closed with stitches and covered with a dressing (bandage). Most surgeons take pictures from the video monitor during the procedure to show you what they found and the repairs that were made.

Your surgeon may need to do open surgery if there is a lot of damage. Open surgery means you will have a large incision so that the surgeon can get directly to your bones and tissues.

Why the Procedure Is Performed
Arthroscopy may be recommended for these shoulder problems:

A torn or damaged cartilage ring (labrum) or ligaments
Shoulder instability, in which the shoulder joint is loose and slides around too much or becomes dislocated (slips out of the ball and socket joint)
A torn or damaged biceps tendon
A torn rotator cuff
A bone spur or inflammation around the rotator cuff
Inflammation or damaged lining of the joint, often caused by an illness, such as rheumatoid arthritis
Arthritis of the end of the clavicle (collarbone)
Loose tissue that needs to be removed
Shoulder impingement syndrome, to make more room for the shoulder to move around
Risks
Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are:

Allergic reactions to medicines
Breathing problems
Bleeding, blood clots, infection
Risks of shoulder arthroscopy are:

Shoulder stiffness
Failure of the surgery to relieve symptoms
The repair fails to heal
Weakness of the shoulder
Blood vessel or nerve injury
Damage to the cartilage of shoulder (chondrolysis)
Before the Procedure
Tell your surgeon what medicines you are taking. This includes medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription.

During the 2 weeks before your surgery:

You may be asked to temporarily stop taking blood thinners. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Naprosyn, Aleve), and other medicines.
Ask your surgeon which medicines you should still take on the day of your surgery.
If you have diabetes, heart disease, or other medical conditions, your surgeon may ask you to see your health care provider who treats you for these conditions.
Tell your provider if you have been drinking a lot of alcohol, more than 1 or 2 drinks a day.
If you smoke, try to stop. Ask your provider for help. Smoking can slow wound and bone healing.
Tell your surgeon about any cold, flu, fever, herpes breakout, or other illness you may have before your surgery.
On the day of surgery:

Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking.
Take any medicines you're asked to take with a small sip of water.
Follow instructions on when to arrive at the hospital. Be sure to arrive on time.
After the Procedure
Follow any discharge and self-care instructions you are given.

Recovery can take 1 to 6 months. You will probably have to wear a sling for the first week. If you had a lot of repair done, you may have to wear the sling longer.

You may take medicine to control your pain.

When you can return to work or play sports will depend on what your surgery involved. It can range from 1 week to several months.

Physical therapy may help you regain motion and strength in your shoulder. The length of therapy will depend on what was done during your surgery.

Outlook (Prognosis)
Arthroscopy often results in less pain and stiffness, fewer complications, a shorter (if any) hospital stay, and faster recovery than open surgery.

If you had a repair, your body needs time to heal, even after arthroscopic surgery, just as you would need time to recover from open surgery. Because of this, your recovery time may still be long.

Surgery to fix a cartilage tear is usually done to make the shoulder more stable. Many people recover fully, and their shoulder stays stable. But some people may still have shoulder instability after arthroscopic repair.

Using arthroscopy for rotator cuff repairs or tendinitis usually relieves the pain, but you may not regain all of your strength.

What shoulder injuries does arthroscopic shoulder surgery treat?
Shoulder arthroscopy can remove inflamed tissue. It can also treat injuries such as:

Biceps tendon injuries.
Bone spurs.
Frozen shoulder.
Labrum tears, injuries to the tissue around your shoulder socket.
Osteoarthritis.
Rotator cuff tears.
Rotator cuff tendinitis.
Shoulder impingement syndrome.
Shoulder instability, when your shoulder joint becomes loose or dislocated.

Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time after shoulder surgery?
Your shoulder joint will take weeks to months to completely heal after shoulder arthroscopy. You may notice pain and swelling for at least several weeks.

Ice and pain medication can help with pain relief. You can also try sleeping propped up in a chair or bed for a few days after your surgery. Your surgeon may recommend a sling to protect your shoulder.

A rehabilitation plan includes gentle exercise and physical therapy. It can increase your shoulder movement and strength. Your healthcare provider will give you a rehab plan that suits your specific shoulder surgery.

When can I go back to work/school/drive/eat?
When you can return to your everyday life depends on the complexity of your surgery. If you’ve had a minor procedure, you may be able to return to work or school in a few days. You’ll need longer to recover from more major procedures. Your healthcare provider will offer guidance suitable for your recovery.

When to Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you have any of these symptoms after your surgery:

Fever.
Pain that medication doesn’t help.
Discolored or smelly fluid around the wound.
Tingling or numbness.
Increased swelling.

How can you care for yourself at home?
	Activity
Rest when you feel tired. Getting enough sleep will help you recover. You may be more comfortable if you sleep in a reclining chair. To make your arm and shoulder feel better, keep a thin pillow under the back of your arm while you are lying down.
Try to walk each day. Start by walking a little more than you did the day before. Bit by bit, increase the amount you walk. Walking boosts blood flow and helps prevent pneumonia and constipation.
For 2 to 3 weeks, avoid lifting anything heavier than a plate or a glass. You need to give your shoulder time to heal.
Your arm may be in a sling. You may need to use the sling for a few days to a few weeks. Your doctor will advise you on how long to wear the sling.
You may take the sling off when you dress or wash.
	Diet
You can eat your normal diet. If your stomach is upset, try bland, low-fat foods like plain rice, broiled chicken, toast, and yogurt.
Drink plenty of fluids, unless your doctor tells you not to.
You may notice that your bowel movements are not regular right after your surgery. This is common. Try to avoid constipation and straining with bowel movements. You may want to take a fibre supplement every day. If you have not had a bowel movement after a couple of days, ask your doctor about taking a mild laxative.
	Medicines
Your doctor will tell you if and when you can restart your medicines. You will also get instructions about taking any new medicines.
If you stopped taking aspirin or some other blood thinner, your doctor will tell you when to start taking it again.
Take pain medicines exactly as directed.
If the doctor gave you a prescription medicine for pain, take it as prescribed.
If you are not taking a prescription pain medicine, ask your doctor if you can take an over-the-counter medicine.
If you think your pain medicine is making you sick to your stomach:
Take your medicine after meals (unless your doctor has told you not to).
Ask your doctor for a different pain medicine.
If your doctor prescribed antibiotics, take them as directed. Do not stop taking them just because you feel better. You need to take the full course of antibiotics.
	Incision care
If you have a dressing over your incision, keep it clean and dry. You may remove it 2 to 3 days after the surgery.
If your incision is open to the air, keep the area clean and dry.
If you have strips of tape on the incision, leave the tape on for a week or until it falls off.
	Exercise
You may need rehabilitation. This is a series of exercises you do after your surgery. Rehab helps you get back your shoulder's range of motion and strength. You will work with your doctor and physiotherapist to plan this exercise program. To get the best results, you need to do the exercises correctly and as often and as long as your doctor tells you.
	Ice
To reduce swelling and pain, put ice or a cold pack on your shoulder for 10 to 20 minutes at a time. Do this every 1 to 2 hours. Put a thin cloth between the ice and your skin. If your doctor recommended cold therapy using a portable machine, follow the directions that came with the machine.

You may feel a little unstable after surgery. If you feel dizzy and tired, don’t worry and don’t stress yourself. Relaxation is what your body needs most. It would be best if you didn’t try to get out of bed quickly.
The good news is that you shouldn’t feel any pain thanks to medicines, but the anaesthetic may make you feel a little nauseous. It happens to several people, so if you do experience this, DO not worry.
You will feel comfortable enough to walk at some point, but don’t make the mistake of believing that you can manoeuvre as quickly as you did before the operation. Dressing and standing will be a little tricky at first, but you won’t feel any pain, and it will get easier over time. 
Whatever you do, be sure to take pain medication before the nerve blockers go away.
It is normal to experience swelling and discomfort in the shoulder a few days or a week after surgery. Ice should be applied every hour or two for 20 to 30 minutes. Place a light towel or t-shirt next to your skin when using ice in a plastic bag. Applying ice is most important during the first 48 hours, although many people feel that ice’s continued use will reduce postoperative pain.
If you have a nerve block, a local anaesthetic can numb your shoulder for several hours. When you leave the hospital, you will be prescribed strong pain relievers. If you find that you didn’t receive it well, contact the doctor. Many patients find that lying down increases their discomfort. You can sleep better in an armchair or bed. A pillow behind your elbows can also help.
Keep postoperative dressings clean and dry. Unless the swelling makes it wet or too tight, leave the bandage in place for at least two days. Remove the bandage two days after surgery. Cover the incisions with tape to protect the threads from the clothes. Then you can shower, but try to keep the wound dry for the first 10-14 days. Do not immediately wet the incision (shower or swim) for at least two weeks.
The sutures are absorbable and don’t have to be removed.
The doctor recommends going back to the office 10-14 days after surgery. If you haven’t planned your first postoperative visit, please contact the hospital and have an appointment.
Start your postoperative rehabilitation/physiotherapy right away. Your physical therapy program is the key to success; this should start the day after surgery. A separate recipe describes the protocol. Often it helps to call before surgery to schedule an appointment with your physical therapist. Pump your hands and move your writing and your elbows to help keep blood flowing and prevent stiffness.
Be in adult care  
Don’t drink alcohol or smoke.
You can eat regular food if you are not breastfeeding. Drink lots of non-alcoholic and decaffeinated fluids.
Don’t make important decisions or sign any legal documents.
Plan a few days off.

Arthroscopic Ankle Surgery - Procedure and Recovery
Jul 01, 2013|Orthopedic Care
Related Services
Foot and Ankle
Podiatry
If you have been suffering from ankle pain, arthroscopic ankle surgery may be an effective treatment option. This minimally invasive procedure will repair damaged cartilage and help to relieve pain caused by the damaged cartilage. Depending on the severity of your injury the surgery recovery could take 4 to 6 weeks but generally the recovery time for an arthroscopic surgery is much faster than regular open surgery. If you suffer from chronic ankle pain, your physician may have recommended this procedure or you may be researching arthroscopic ankle surgery. Whatever the case, in this article we’ll review the procedure and recovery process.

Arthroscopic Ankle Surgery Procedure
You will be brought to an operating room where your ankle will be cleaned and sterilized and you’ll also be prepared for anesthesia. Once you are anesthetized, the surgeon will make small incisions to your ankle and inject a fluid into the ankle joint. This fluid will help to expand the joint which will help the surgeon to get a better visual of the damaged cartilage and more space to operate.

Now that the joint is expanded, the surgeon will insert an arthroscope that has a camera and will allow him to inspect the damaged area by using the video images. Once the damaged cartilage is found, the surgeon will use special tools to remove the damaged cartilage from your ankle. After the damaged cartilage is removed, the surgeon may drill small holes in the bone area to cause bleeding. When the blood clots, it will create repair cartilage. With the damaged cartilage removed and the repair cartilage developing, the tools are removed and the incisions are closed.

The Recovery
After the surgical procedure, you may be allowed to use crutches to minimize the pressure put on your ankle, or your foot may be put in an immobilizer like a walking cast or a splint for 4 to 6 weeks. The length of time and the type of immobilizer used is dependent on the severity of injury. Your physician will give you rehabilitation instructions and it’s important you follow those instructions and not attempt to start rehab too early or never do any rehab at all.

What happens after ankle arthroscopy?
Ankle arthroscopy is almost always an outpatient surgery, and you should be able to go home the same day as your procedure.

Your provider or surgeon will go over the results of your surgery and tell you what you need to do to heal and recover.

You may need to:

Avoid putting weight or pressure on your ankle or foot.
Ice and elevate your ankle.
Keep the incision clean and covered.
Take NSAIDs for pain.
Take showers, not baths, until the incision heals. You might also need to keep your incision covered and to prevent it from getting wet.
You’ll probably have to wear a splint on your ankle for a few weeks after your surgery. Your surgeon will tell you when you can start moving your ankle and when you’ll start physical therapy.

What is the recovery time for ankle arthroscopy?
Most people recover from an ankle arthroscopy in a few months. Your exact time to heal fully depends on your reason for needing surgery, and how quickly you regain your stability, strength and range of motion.

You might need crutches or to wear a splint on your ankle for a few weeks after surgery. After that, you should be able to start walking in a boot.

You’ll also need physical therapy after your arthroscopy. This could be as simple as at-home stretches and exercises you do yourself. Your surgeon or provider will show you how to perform them safely after your surgery. Depending on how complicated your surgery is, you might need to work with a physical therapist to get your ankle back to its usual level of strength and mobility.

You should be able to return to intense exercise and/or sports a few months after surgery, depending on how quickly your ankle heals.

When can I go back to work or school after ankle arthroscopy?
You should be able to return to work or school a few weeks after an ankle arthroscopy — as long as it’s possible to do your job or schoolwork seated. Ask your provider or surgeon how long you should wait before resuming any activity that might put stress on your ankle. Your surgeon may also recommend that you avoid sitting still for too long. You may need to take several short breaks throughout the day to stretch and move about.

When to Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:

Intense pain or bleeding.
Nausea and vomiting.
Signs of an infection, such as fever or discoloration at the incision site.

After your surgery, your ankle will be bandaged, and these bandages remain on for two weeks. You will be shown how to walk using crutches and will be given a special sandal to aid your recovery. Most patients are able to go home on the same day as their operation.

You should try to rest your foot, keeping as much weight off it as possible, and keeping it raised above the level of your heart whenever you can, especially in the first week after your operation.

Once this week has passed, your pain levels should have reduced greatly, and you can start walking short distances, for example to a car. Depending on your job, you may be able to return to work during the second week, however if it involves heavy manual labour you will need to wait a month after your surgery before you can resume work.

Once your wound has completely dried up and healed, you can go swimming and apply moisturiser to the wound itself to reduce scarring. Around three to four weeks after your surgery, patients are able to resume low impact exercise.

Ankle Arthroscopy Post-Surgery FAQ
Weight Bearing
How much weight should I put on my leg?

All of it. One of the greatest advantages of ankle arthroscopy is that you may start walking on the operated ankle right away.

Do I need to use crutches? For how long?

Many surgeons give their patients crutches after surgery while many do not. It is hard to predict who may or may not need them. Use the crutches as needed. Some patients need crutches for a few days after surgery to help support them while walking while others never use them at all.

If you need then, use them.

Ice
How much ice and for how long?

There is no right or wrong answer to this question.

Ice simply helps with the swelling and can help to decrease pain after surgery. For the first few days after the surgery, our advice is “the more, the better.” We recommend icing for approximately 30 minutes 3–5 times per day. The first night and first day following surgery, use ice as much as possible.

Will the ice penetrate through the dressing?

Yes, it will. It might not feel like it, but it does.

Will the moisture from the ice get my incision wet?

No. There are many layers under the tape.

Dressing/Bandage
My dressing fell off; what should I do?

Don’t worry; due to the shape of our legs, this does happen. You may want to try to pull it back into place. You may want to unwrap the ace wrap bandage and reapply it. You may want to remove the dressing, place large band-aids over the incisions, and reapply the ace wraps. Prior to this, please wash your hands, and don’t mess with the incisions.

My appointment is not for a week; do I need to keep the dressing on?

We would like the operative dressing to be left in place for the first 3 days. After that, you may follow the above instructions. We recommend removing the dressing, placing large band-aids over the incisions, and then reapplying the ace wrap.

When can I shower?

You will need to cover the dressing and brace to keep it dry while in the shower. There are a variety of ways to do this. We suggest wrapping the leg with plastic wrap (e.g., – Handi-Wrap, etc.) above and below the dressing. You may also use a plastic bag with tape or a rubber band.

Can I bend my ankle?

Yes. This will cause no harm to your ankle.

The pain medicine doesn’t last long enough, but the bottle says “take every 3–4 hours”. Can I take it more often?

People vary in how much and how often they need to take pain medicine. Pain pills take a good 30–45 minutes to be absorbed and start giving relief. Try to anticipate and stay ahead of the pain the first several days after surgery.

Don’t be a clock-watcher. If the pain medicine only lasts 2.5 hours instead of 3–4 hours like the bottle says, simply take it a little more often. If you are in pain, take medicine. Don’t suffer. Some people never take a pain pill after surgery and other patients take them for a week or so. We are all different. If you have a history of drug or alcohol use, you will probably find that you will require more medications.

Can I take Tylenol® or ibuprofen (Advil®/Motrin®)?

The pain medicine is mixed with Tylenol® so do not take any additional Tylenol®. You may take ibuprofen along with your prescribed pain medications.

When do I need to see my doctor in the office?

Your doctor usually makes your first one or two appointments in advance. Simply call the office to make or find out. The appointment might not be for a week or so. We have an open-door policy; that is, if you have any concerns or problems before your first appointment, just call the office, and your doctor will see you.

When can I start physical therapy?

You may start the following week. If you have already seen a therapist before surgery or know where we plan to start therapy after surgery, we suggest setting up your appointments in advance. Most of the therapy places are very busy, so setting up your appointments in advance will allow you more choice of time to attend.

Can I drive? When?

While you are on pain medication, do not drive. We believe that you may drive when you feel it’s safe. Consider this analogy: if you were driving and got into a car accident with yourself and saw yourself get out of the other car (follow that?) . . . How would you react if you were that other driver, and to whom would your first phone call be? If that first call is to a lawyer, then don’t drive!

When can I return to work?

It depends on the type of job you have. If you do mainly desk work or sedentary work, you may return when you feel up to it. Most people return within 3–5 days. If you have a physical/labor-intensive job, then expect to take at least a couple of weeks off. We will discuss it as you progress postoperatively. Most people return to regular activities/sports anywhere between 4–8 weeks after surgery. This usually sport-dependent and depends on your level of activity (e.g., high school, recreational, college, professional).

Elbow Arthroscopy
Anatomy
The elbow is a complex joint that allows bending and straightening (flexion and extension), and forearm rotation (pronation, palm down; and supination, palm up). The elbow is formed by the joining of three bones: the upper arm (humerus), the forearm on the pinky finger side (ulna), and the forearm on the thumb side (radius). The surfaces of these bones, where they meet to form the joint, are covered with articular cartilage, a smooth substance that protects the bones and acts as a natural cushion to absorb forces across the joint. A thin, smooth tissue, called synovial membrane, covers all remaining surfaces inside the elbow joint. In a healthy elbow, this membrane makes a small amount of fluid that lubricates the cartilage and eliminates almost all friction as you bend and rotate your arm.

Description
Arthroscopy is a minimally invasive surgical procedure used by orthopaedic surgeons to visualize, diagnose and treat problems inside the joint. Injury, overuse, and age-related wear and tear are responsible for most elbow problems. Your doctor may recommend elbow arthroscopy if you have a painful condition that does not respond to nonsurgical treatments such as rest, physical therapy and medications or injections to reduce inflammation. Elbow arthroscopy may relieve the painful symptoms of many problems that damage the cartilage surfaces and other soft tissues surrounding the joint.

Common arthroscopic procedures for the elbow include: osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteochondritis dissecans (activity-related damage to the capitellum portion of the humerus, as seen in throwers or gymnasts); removal of loose bodies (loose cartilage and bone fragments); and release of scar tissue to improve range of motion.

Preparation
Once the decision to have surgery is made, your orthopaedic surgeon may ask you to see your primary care physician to be sure you do not have any medical problems that need to be addressed before surgery. Additional tests may be needed, such as blood and urine samples, electrocardiogram (EKG), or chest X-ray. If you have certain health risks, a more extensive evaluation may be required. Be sure to inform your othopaedic surgeon of any medications or supplements you take, as these may need to be stopped prior to surgery.

If your general health is good, your arthroscopy is likely to be performed on an outpatient basis, which means you will not be required to stay overnight in the hospital. It is very important that you follow all instructions regarding when to stop eating or drinking prior to surgery, and when to arrive at the hospital.

Surgery
Before the operation, you will be evaluated by a member of the anesthesia team. Elbow arthroscopy is usually performed using general anesthesia (you are put to sleep). Regional nerve block injections (you are awake but the elbow area is numb) are rarely used in elbow arthroscopy because the numbing effect can continue for hours after surgery is finished. Although this can help with pain management, it prevents your surgeon from performing a careful nerve examination in the recovery room to be sure that the nerves traveling down your arm are functioning properly. Your surgeon will see you before the surgery and sign your elbow to verify the surgical site.

In the operating room, you will receive general anesthesia and possibly intravenous antibiotics to lessen the risk of infection after surgery. Your surgeon may draw lines on your elbow to indicate specific structures (such as the ulnar nerve and olecranon bone), incision placements and portals for the arthroscope.

During surgery, your surgeon will make several small incisions to introduce the arthroscope and other small instruments. Filling your elbow with fluid will allow a clearer view inside the joint, and lessen risk of injury to surrounding blood vessels and nerves. Your surgeon will review projected images from the arthroscope to evaluate the inside of your joint before any specific treatments are begun. Once the problem is identified, your surgeon will insert specialized instruments for tasks such as shaving, cutting, grasping, suture passing and knot tying, as well as a special device often used to anchor stitches into bone. Incisions may be stitched or covered with skin tapes, followed by application of an absorbent dressing. Depending on the procedure, your surgeon will then apply an additional soft dressing that allows movement, or a plaster splint that restricts movement and offers more protection.

You will remain in the recovery room for 1 or 2 hours after surgery. During that time, nurses will monitor your responsiveness and recovery from the anesthesia, and provide pain medication, if needed. You may be given a regional anesthetic for pain control—after your orthopaedic surgeon has completed a nerve examination. When you are ready to go home, you will be given discharge instructions covering medications, need for ice and elevation, and dressing care. You will need someone to drive you home and stay with you, at least during the first night.

Recovery
Although recovery from arthroscopy is often faster than recovery from open surgery, your elbow joint may need weeks to recover completely. You can expect some pain and discomfort for at least 2 weeks after surgery. If your surgery was extensive, it may be several weeks before the pain subsides. Your doctor will likely prescribe pain medicine to be taken regularly for the first few days after surgery, as well as other medications such as stool softeners or anti-inflammatory drugs.

It is important to apply ice and elevate your elbow regularly for 48 hours after surgery to reduce the risk of severe swelling and to help relieve pain. To elevate, place your elbow in a resting position that is higher than your heart, with your hand placed higher than the elbow. Depending on the type of surgery performed, your doctor may give you specific instructions for longer periods of ice and elevation.

You will probably be encouraged to move your fingers and wrist frequently to help stimulate circulation and minimize swelling. Early range-of-motion exercises may also be recommended to prevent joint stiffness. Your orthopaedic surgeon will let you know when you can begin these gentle exercises and return to daily activities.

Dressing care will depend on the type of surgery performed and the preferences of your physician. In most cases, the operative dressing and/or splint is removed 2 to 3 days after surgery. During this time, your dressing must be left intact and kept dry. In some instances, you may be instructed to keep the dressing in place until your first postoperative clinic visit.

Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation plays an important role in getting you back to your daily activities. Your surgeon will develop an exercise program to help you facilitate motion, strength, and return of function of the elbow. This may include basic exercises to begin at home, or for more advanced surgeries, physical therapy may be prescribed after the first postoperative visit. The physical therapy prescribed will depend on the type and severity of your problem and the surgery required. Your surgeon will tell you when you can return to work, driving and normal daily activities.

What should I expect after elbow arthroscopy?
In most cases, you can go home within a couple of hours after the procedure. Incision care is important. You may need to:

Ice and elevate your elbow.
Keep the incision clean, dry and covered.
Take NSAIDs to relieve pain.
Wash in the shower, not bathe, until the incision heals.
Wear a sling, splint or brace.
What are the risks of elbow arthroscopy?
Arthroscopy is a relatively safe procedure. But the elbow is a small area, containing bone, muscle, blood vessels and nerves. Surgeons use arthroscopy less often to treat the elbow than for other, larger joints, such as the knee and shoulder.

Potential complications include:

Allergic reaction to anesthesia.
Blood clot, including deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
Damage to nearby tissue or nerves.
Excessive bleeding or swelling.
Infection.
Nerve irritation or injury.
Results and Follow-Up
When should I know the results of elbow arthroscopy?
If you had a biopsy, you should receive results in several days. If your surgeon used arthroscopy to treat an elbow condition, they can typically tell you that day about how it went. Keep all follow-up appointments, so your surgeon can check on your progress.

When should I call my provider after having elbow arthroscopy?
Call your provider or seek immediate medical care if you experience:

Confusion.
Difficulty breathing.
Excessive bleeding.
High fever.
Inability to urinate (pee) or poop.
Leg pain, redness or swelling.
Pain that is not controlled by medication.
Unexpected swelling or drainage (pus) in the affected area.

Additional Details
When can I return to my regular activities after elbow arthroscopy?
Your recovery after elbow arthroscopy depends on the condition of your joint and the extent of the damage. It also depends on whether your surgeon treated the elbow during the procedure.

You may experience some pain and discomfort for several weeks after surgery. Most people can return to school or work within a few days. Full recovery may take many months. Talk to your healthcare provider about when it's safe to return to the activities you enjoy.

Will I need physical therapy after elbow arthroscopy?
Your healthcare provider may recommend exercises to prevent joint stiffness and reduce swelling. Physical therapy may also help strengthen muscles and restore mobility.

Recovery
Postoperative
After surgery, you will stay in the recovery room for 1 to 2 hours before being discharged home. For some complex arthroscopic procedures, patients may be admitted to the hospital overnight. Nurses will monitor your responsiveness and provide pain medication, if needed. You will be provided discharge instructions that cover medications, need for ice and elevation, as well dressing care. You will need someone to drive you home and stay with you for at least the first night.

At Home
Although recovery from arthroscopy is often faster than recovery from open surgery, it may still take from weeks to months for your elbow joint to completely recover.

You can expect some pain and discomfort for several weeks after surgery. If you have had a more extensive surgery, however, it may take longer before your pain subsides. Your doctor will likely prescribe pain medicine to be taken regularly for the first few days after surgery. In addition, other medicines such as stool softeners or anti-inflammatory medicines may be prescribed.

It is important to ice and elevate your elbow regularly for 48 hours after surgery. This will reduce the risk of severe swelling and help to relieve pain. When elevating your arm, whether you lie flat or recline, make sure your elbow is resting higher than your heart and your hand is positioned higher than your elbow. Depending on the type of surgery performed, your doctor may have specific instructions for longer periods of ice and elevation.

You will most likely be encouraged to move your fingers and wrist frequently to help stimulate circulation and minimize swelling. Your doctor may recommend early range-of-motion exercises to prevent joint stiffness. When you can start these gentle exercises, as well as return to daily activities, will depend on the type of surgery performed.

Dressing care will depend on the type of surgery performed and the preferences of your doctor. In most cases, the operative dressing and/or splint is removed 2 to 3 days after surgery. During this time, your dressing must be left intact and kept dry. In some instances, you may be instructed to keep the dressing in place until your first postoperative clinic visit with your doctor.

Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation plays an important role in getting you back to your daily activities. An exercise program will help you regain elbow and forearm motion and strength. Your surgeon will develop a rehabilitation plan based on the surgical procedures you required.

In some cases, your doctor will instruct you or a family member with basic exercises to begin at home a few days following surgery. In more advanced surgeries, physical therapy is often prescribed after the first postoperative visit to facilitate motion, strength, and return of function of the elbow. The type and duration of therapy will depend on the type of problem you have and the type of surgery you required.

Return to driving, basic activities of daily living, and return to work will depend on the type of surgery you required and should be discussed with your doctor prior to surgery.

Postoperative Care
Sling instructions: The sling is used for your comfort and to assist with elevating the arm. Sometimes with elbow surgery it is difficult to wear the sling or you may not be comfortable in a sling. It is important to elevate your hand above your elbow and your elbow above your shoulder.


Diet: We recommend that you eat a light diet the evening of surgery and the next day but you may resume eating a regular diet as soon as you tolerate it.
Pain control: When you are discharged from the hospital you will be given a prescription for pain medicine. You may take this medicine as prescribed. You will be given the option to purchase a cold pack machine. This machine has a sleeve which is attached to an ice cooler. You place ice and some water in the cooler and plug this in to a regular outlet. This circulates cold water through the shoulder sleeve providing relief of pain and swelling after surgery. You should keep ice on the elbow frequently for the first 48-72 hours after surgery. We recommend icing 2-3 times per day for the first week especially before sleep.
Wound care: You will be given instructions on how to care for your elbow dressing. In some cases two dressings are applied to the elbow and you will be instructed to take the outer layer off after a day or two. In most cases the dressing you have should remain in place until your next office visit. The dressing has a special antibiotic layer that decreases the risk of infection. The dressing should be kept clean and dry. It is very important to follow the discharge instructions. If you have questions please call the office. You may not get in a hot tub or pool and immerse the incisions underwater for six weeks but you may get in the shower and let the water run over them once the dressing has been removed. Pat the incisions dry afterwards, and place band-aids over the incisions. There is no need to place any ointment over the incisions. It is better to keep them dry. If you notice drainage, swelling or increased pain 5 days after surgery please call the office. Redness around the incision is very common and should not be a concern unless it is associated with drainage at any point after the dressing is removed, or with redness spreading away from the incision or fevers. Often after elbow arthroscopy there is a significant amount of bruising and swelling in the elbow, forearm and hand. This is related to minor internal bleeding and is normal. It may take several weeks for all of the bruising and swelling to resolve.
Sleep: It is often very difficult to sleep in the week or two following surgery. The surgery itself may interfere with your sleep-wake cycle. You will likely be most comfortable with your arm propped on pillows. This often helps with the pain.
Driving: Operating a motor vehicle may be difficult due to you inability to use your operative arm. If you should have an accident or get pulled over while wearing a sling or splint, the authorities may consider that driving while impaired. The decision to drive is based on your comfort level with driving essentially one-handed. If you need to drive you should wait at least until you have seen your doctor at the first postoperative visit. Once you are out of your sling and/or splint you may drive once you feel safe operating a vehicle. No one should operate a motor vehicle while taking narcotic medications. Please limit car driving until you are off narcotics.
Physical therapy: The decision to prescribe physical therapy and when to start these activities is made on a case by case basis. This will be discussed with you on your first postoperative visit. It is rare that you surgeon will prescribe therapy before your first postoperative visit. It is important that you start to move the elbow after 48 hours. Because the dressing is soft, movement is possible with minimal restriction. You may be instructed by your surgeon/recovery room nurse to begin gentle range of motion exercises on the day of surgery. These will be self directed exercises that you start on your own. Most patients are encouraged to stretch their elbow 3 or 4 times per day. The recommended motions include stretching the elbow straight, then bending the elbow, followed by turning the palm up towards the ceiling and then down toward the floor with the elbow bent. Each motion should be repeated 10 times. You may use the opposite arm to assist stretching in each direction. These motions sometimes cause pain, but it is OK to push into the pain a little to prevent the elbow from becoming stiff after surgery.

Elbow arthroscopy
As for other large joints, keyhole surgery techniques are now capable of addressing many conditions.  Elbow arthroscopy is able to provide your surgeon with an excellent view of the structures inside your elbow and keyhole techniques can be employed to address: loose body removal; tennis elbow release; elbow Arthrolysis; elbow Impingement surgery (Osteoplasty) and radial head resection.

 The procedure is performed under general anaesthetic.  Local anaesthetic is infiltrated into your joint.  The Arthroscope and instruments are then carefully inserted into your elbow joint through tiny incisions. Your joint surfaces are inspected and any problems identified and managed accordingly.



View of antero-lateral aspect of elbow, with arthroscope passed through antero-medial portal. Needle passed into joint through lateral side


View of tip of coronoid (ulna) and the trochlea  (humerus) - this is the front part of the main hinge of the elbow. The arthroscope is still in the same portal as the first image.
 

This is a view of the posterior elbow compartment.  A loose body (highlighted with dashed line) is floating in this compartment.  This was removed to treat clicking, pain and locking of the elbow.

What are the risks of elbow arthroscopy?
This is generally a safe procedure, but there are some specific risks relating to arthroscopy of the elbow:

Nerve injury is slightly more common after keyhole surgery to the elbow, although this is normally a temporary problem.  The nerves that cross your elbow pass close to the entry points for the Arthroscope and surgical instruments.  The way Mr Granville-Chapman accesses and operates within your elbow is designed to minimise the risk of nerve injury.  However, injury to nerves may still occur.

The ulna nerve passes just behind the inside knuckle (medial epicondyle) of your elbow.  Permanent injury is very rare, but temporary altered sensation in your little and ring finger can occasionally occur. If the nerve is injured more severely it could also produce weakness of grip in your hand.

The posterior interosseous nerve is a motor nerve that supplies many of your forearm and finger muscles. It runs within a muscle very close to your elbow and is potentially vulnerable.  Again, permanent injury is very rare, but if it were to happen, this could cause significant weakness in your wrist and hand that might require reconstructive surgery.

Infection is rare after keyhole surgery (<1%)

Wound healing problems are uncommon and Mr Granville-Chapman will suture your portal sites to minimize this risk.

What is my recovery after elbow arthroscopy?
This is normally a day case procedure.  You may take down your bulky bandages after 3 days, but please keep your wounds dressed for 14 days. You can shower after 4 days with your dressings on. Please begin your painkillers as soon as you get home and continue them regularly for the first few days. Unless told otherwise, you can begin gentle elbow motion the day after your surgery and discard the sling when comfortable.

You will be seen two weeks after surgery and thereafter according to your needs.

Return to work and normality will vary depending on what’s been done in your elbow and your own pace of recovery. As a minimum, you should plan 2 weeks off work and driving, but you may require longer.

